Add ADR 019 proposing improvement of changelog (#1733)
informalsystems/apalache: docs/src/adr/019adr-changelog-management.md

### 4. Write some lightweight tooling

We could author some simple tooling that would capture the core behavior of
`unclog`, using files in directories, but neither require external dependencies
nor knowledge of a new CLI.

#### Pros

- No new tooling to learn
- No external dependencies to integrate

#### Cons

- Would require some development time (=< 1 day)
- Would require contributors to understand the folder structure

## Solution

We have opted for option 4. Despite the added cost of development, we think the
simplicity of use and maintenance will offset the development cost.

### Design

We will introduce a new directory tree to the project:

```sh
.unreleased/
├── breaking-changes/
├── bug-fixes/
├── documentation/
└── features/
```

Each change will be added as a single markdown file in the appropriate
directory.

Two `sbt` targets will be added to facilitate our continuous deployment:

- `releaseNotes`, merges the unreleased notes into a single new file of the expected format in our `target` directory. This can be used for upload to github releases.
- `changeLog` updates `CHANGES.md` by prepending the output of `releaseNotes`. It then removes all notes

>   from the `.unreleased` directory so that the next iteration of development starts from a clean slate.

Reviewer: If we are still maintaining a version controlled `CHANGES.md`, wouldn't it still be prone to conflicts on concurrent PRs? If I understand correctly, this will just make it easier to fix the conflict (in an automated way), but then I believe the git merge driver would be a better option.

---
authors: Shon Feder
last revised: 2022-05-06
---

# ADR-019: Harmonize changelog management

**Table of Contents**

- [Summary (Overview)](#summary)
- [Context (Problem)](#context)
- [Options (Alternatives)](#options)
- [Solution (Decision)](#solution)
- [Consequences (Retrospection)](#consequences)

## Summary

In the context of maintaining a changelog to communicate salient changes about
our software, facing the friction caused by frequent merge conflicts in our
`UNRELEASED` changelog, we decided to find a lightweight, conflict free,
changelog process in order to achieve a smoother development process. We have
accepted the development cost and learning curve required by adopting a new
process.

## Context

We maintain a [changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/)

> To make it easier for users and contributors to see precisely what notable

> > changes have been made between each release (or version) of the project.

Author: I read this as a single sentence and don't think the colon reads correctly. But maybe lowercasing the leading `T` in `to` of the blockquote would make that clearer?

> We maintain a [changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/)
> 
> > To make it easier for users and contributors to see precisely what notable
> > changes have been made between each release (or version) of the project.

Reviewer 2: Aaah, that makes sense. Yes then please
```suggestion
We maintain a [changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/)

> to make it easier for users and contributors to see precisely what notable
> changes have been made between each release (or version) of the project.
```

Any changeset that introduces observable changes to the behavior of our software
should include additions to the changelog.  Currently, additions are made by
updating the `UNRELEASED.md` file. The changes recorded there are then added to

> the `CHANGES.md` file during our automated release process.

Author: Nothing required as part of this that isn't already part of our release pipeline.

for automatically generating changelogs. These tools extract changelogs from
various different sources such as commit messages, issues, or pull requests.
    
#### Pros

- Requires no new development
- Would eliminate the need to add changelog entries in a separate file

#### Cons

- Developers have to learn the annotation format required by the tool, and they
  have to remember to deploy it in their commits/PRs/issues.
- Infrastructure maintainers have to learn how to configure and maintain the tool.
- We pickup a dependency external to both the company and our project
- Changelogs are meant to communicate a very specific kind of information to a
  specific audience. Git commit messages, pull requests, and issues are for
  communicating quite different information to an entirely different audience.
  Requiring that these communication channels be overloaded risks degrading the
  quality of communications in all the conflated channels.
  - However, it's possible we could work out some conventions to add empty
    commits or designate special PR labels to work around this interference?

### 2. Use Unclog

> @thanethompson has written the [unclog][] utility, which is used in both

Author: Thanks for the fix!

[informalsystems/tendermint-rs][] and [informalsystems/ibc-rs][]. The tool
stores changelog entries in a directory structure, with each entry in its own
file, ensuring merge conflicts can't arise. 

Entries are added via the CLI. E.g.:

```sh
unclog add --id some-new-feature \
  --issue 23 \
  --section breaking-changes \
  --message "Some *new* feature"
```

If the `--messages` argument is omitted, it will open your configured editor for
authoring the message.

The tool has subcommands to generate and update the `CHANGES.md`, and it supports
a variety of options via its TOML configuration.

[unclog]: https://github.com/informalsystems/unclog
[informalsystems/tendermint-rs]: https://github.com/informalsystems/tendermint-rs
[informalsystems/ibc-rs]: https://github.com/informalsystems/ibc-rs

#### Pros

- Requires no new development
- It is developed internally to informal

#### Cons

- Adds cognitive and procedural overhead to adding changelog entries

> - Would add a rust dependency to our devenv

Author: Yeah, the current packaging is currently from source and installed with cargo. We could of course package it up, probably make a nix package for it? Tho I can't even estimate how long that would take.

Honestly, requiring a dependency on cargo is not the most arduous thing in the world, it just seems kind of heavyhanded to me given how simple the problem is here. Like we're 70% there with `find .changelog/unreleased -iname '*.md' -exec cat {} \;`

> - Requires external contributors to either install a CLI tool or figure out a

Reviewer 3: I don't know much about the rust stack; is there a way to keep the installation very simple, e.g. precompiled binaries for common platforms?

Author: That would keep the installation simple for those platforms, but this adds even more overhead for the setup, since no such precompiled are currently available. afaiu, rust libs dynamically link against glibc, so it doesn't provide the same sort of highly portable binaries we'd get from Go, or a JAR file (modulo JVM req).

We could package it for each platform, but that's an even heavier lift.

For the sake of reducing setup speed in our CI, we could precompile a binary for the particular architecture we use (we do this for emojitsu). But this won't help developers or external contributors much.

Still, installing from cargo is not difficult, it's just one extra step.

Moreover, as @konnov has pointed out, it should be possible to just maintain the entries by hand in the directory structure, as we'd do any how.

The format is a bit finicky (for some reason requiring an issue number to start every file name) and they have to be formatted as a single bullet point, but it's not too terribly confusing if we document it clearly.

Reviewer 3: Okay, precompiling probably seems not very beneficial, thanks for the insight.

Author: It is a good thing to consider if we find a CI slowdown as a result of this dependency! It would also help users, of course. It's just that maintaining packages for bunch of different systems is quite a bit of work (afaik) and since it's not already already done, that work would probably fall on us.

We **could** probably drop this dependency into our nix flake configuration. That might be the best option here from a devenv perspective. I'll include a note about that.

  relatively complex file and folder structure to add changelog entries

### 3. Use a custom git merge driver

> If we wrote a custom merge driver to work on the simple changelog format we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we wrote a [custom git merge driver](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitattributes#_defining_a_custom_merge_driver) to work on the simple changelog format we
```

could continue our current practice, and just fall back to the custom merge
driver in case of merge conflicts.

#### Pros

- Allows us to keep our current process of simply updating a markdown file,
  with which, moreover, most devs are already familiar

#### Cons

- Could require external dependencies to be installed, depending on
  implementation.

> - It's not possible to configure custom merge drivers for github, so we'd either

Reviewer 2: Did you test this? libgit2 which seems to drive the merge on github [seems to support this](https://github.com/libgit2/libgit2/pull/3564#issuecomment-217581428).

Author: Right, there's no problem to install custom merge drivers on github runners in CI. But github doesn't allow configuration of custom merge drivers on the auto merge functionality it uses to update PRs. And without that, we'll have the added overhead of writing a bot/action that monitors our pending PRs and then updates them with the custom merge strategy installed.

Otherwise we're just back to devs having to fix these locally. While it would save a bit of time having a custom merge driver for these files rather than having to do it manually, it doesn't really clear up the flow the way we want.

That said, I really do like this solution, and I prototyped a very rough merge driver for this last weekend for fun. I think I may pursue that as a side project regardless. Personally, I still am inclined to think that keeping changes in a single markdown file is the nicest way to record them :D

Reviewer 2: > Without that functionality, we'll have the added overhead of writing a bot/action that monitors our pending PRs and then updates them with the custom merge strategy installed.

Yeah no, that seems too complicated...

> Personally, I still am inclined to think that keeping changes in a single markdown file is the nicest way to record them

I agree!

  need to develop a github action or bot to monitor for merge conflicts in the
  changelog and merge them automatically, or devs would be back to having to
  resolve merge conflicts locally.

### 4. Write some lightweight tooling

We could author some simple tooling that would capture the core behavior of
`unclog`, using files in directories, but neither require external dependencies

> nor knowledge of a new CLI.

Reviewer 2: > but neither require external dependencies

That depends very much on the implementation?

> nor knowledge of a new CLI

I don't get this part. If we introduce new tooling, we would need to learn a new CLI? Or did you mean relative to `unclog`?

Reviewer 2: Now that I've read the whole document, this should probably refer down to `### Design`.

#### Pros

- No new tooling to learn

> - No external dependencies to integrate

Reviewer 2: See above.

#### Cons

> - Would require some development time (=< 1 day)

Reviewer 2: I would like to understand more about the proposed implementation, but this estimate seems overly optimistic to me.
Shouldn't we also account for time needed to learn about the new tooling?

Reviewer 2: Now that I've read the whole document, this should probably refer down to `### Design`.

Author: I think there's not anythinb to learn here? Dev's need to know where the directories would be located, by they won't need to run or use any tools.

> - Would require some development time (=< 1 day)

Reviewer 3: We should not forget that even if this is simple, it will also at some point likely require maintenance work by us, so it's not just the up-front cost we'd pay

Author: Isn't this true of all the options? That is, won't all require some maintenance one way or another, whether it be updated configs, or getting bugs fixed, etc.?

Reviewer 2: > won't all require some maintenance one way or another

I guess the current solution does not 😅
Maybe we should list it as an option 😄

Reviewer 3: > Isn't this true of all the options? That is, won't all require some maintenance one way or another, whether it be updated configs, or getting bugs fixed, etc.?

True! I'd however expect the burden to be less in the case of preexisting solutions (e.g. for unclog, other teams also use it, so a similar amount of maintenance serves more users... though communication may then become a larger overhead).

> #### Cons
> 
> - Would require some development time (=< 1 day)
> - Would require contributors to understand the folder structure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Cons

- Requires some development time (=< 1 day)
- Requires contributors to understand the folder structure
- Adds an additional project the Apalache team needs to maintain.
```

Author: The current design just extends our exiting CI automation, so I'd argue it's really not adding another project requiring specific maintenance.

## Solution

We have opted for option 4. Despite the added cost of development, we think the
simplicity of use and maintenance will offset the development cost.

### Design

We will introduce a new directory tree to the project:

```sh
.unreleased/
├── breaking-changes/
├── bug-fixes/
├── documentation/
└── features/
```

Each change will be added as a single markdown file in the appropriate

> directory.

Reviewer 2: What is a "change" in this context? A markdown bullet list?

Reviewer 2: It is sometimes beneficial to keep some logical order among changelog entries, it would be good to support this in the future.

Author: I was thinking an entry describing a change would just be a paragraph or two of markdown. Different entries should be different files. No point in having bullet points inside the files afaict, that seems confusing to me.

Good point about order. I think we can just assemble the log entries in lexigraphic order of the file names. So that can be used to control the ordering within a section.

Reviewer 2: > I was thinking an entry describing a change would just be a paragraph or two of markdown. [...] No point in having bullet points inside the files afaict, that seems confusing to me.

I'm just wondering how this will render in the combined changelog file, but we can leave this for implementation.

Two `sbt` targets will be added to facilitate our continuous deployment:

> - `releaseNotes`, will compile to the unreleased notes into the expected format

Author: ```suggestion
- `releaseNotes`, will compile the unreleased notes into the expected format in a new file our `target` directory. This can be used for upload to github releases
```

> - `releaseNotes`, will compile the unreleased notes into the expected format in a new file our `target` directory. This can be used for upload to github releases

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `releaseNotes`, merges the unreleased notes into a single new file of the expected format in our `target` directory. This can be used for upload to github releases.
```

- `changeLog` will depend on the value of `releaseNotes` and will update
  `CHANGES.md` by prepending the new notes, and then clear out all the notes

>   from the `.unreleased` directory.

Author: ```suggestion
  from the `.unreleased` directory so that they clear for the next iteration of development.
```

>   from the `.unreleased` directory so that they clear for the next iteration of development.

Reviewer 2: > will depend on the value of `releaseNotes`

I don't understand this part.

Author: This `sbt` terminology. Each `sbt` target (in thise, a `taskKey`) has a `.value` attribute that represents whatever is accomplished by the task. In this case, it will be the path to file with the assembled notes for the release. I can make that clearer.

Author: Resolved from your fix. Thanks.

> - `changeLog` will depend on the value of `releaseNotes` and will update
>   `CHANGES.md` by prepending the new notes, and then clear out all the notes
>   from the `.unreleased` directory so that they clear for the next iteration of development.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `changeLog` updates `CHANGES.md` by prepending the output of `releaseNotes`. It then removes all notes
  from the `.unreleased` directory so that the next iteration of development starts from a clean slate.
```

Author: This works!
